Introduction
Several queries have been raised about the type of Visas
issued by India to foreigners for work related visits. It is
clarified that basically there are two (2) types of work related
Visas, namely:-
1. Business Visa designated as ‘B’ Visa
2. Employment Visa designated as ‘E’ Visa
Frequently asked questions with regard to the above
issues and replies thereto are outlined below for information,
guidance and compliance of all concerned:
Part A : Business Visa

What are the conditions to be fulfilled for grant of a Business visa?
The conditions to be fulfilled for grant of a Business visa
are as follows:-
(i) The foreign national must have a valid travel
document and a re-entry permit, if required under the
law of the country of nationality of the applicant.
(ii) The foreign national should be a person of assured
financial standing. The foreigner must submit proof
of his/her financial standing and documentation in
support of intended business visit to India. Proof of
his financial standing and expertise in the field of
intended business will be checked thoroughly by the
Indian Missions while granting the visa.
(iii) The foreign national should not be visiting India for
the business of money lending or for running a petty
business or petty trade or for full time employment
in India, etc.
2
(iv) The foreign national shall comply with all other
requirements like payment of tax liabilities etc.
(v) The Business Visa must be issued from the country
of origin or from the country of habitual domicile of
the foreigner provided the period of residence of that
foreigner in that particular country is more than 2
years. If the period of permanent residence of the
applicant in the particular country is less than two
years, the Mission / Post concerned will issue
Business visa only after personal interview, review
of documentation and prior clearance from the
Mission where the applicant has permanent
residence. Such cases will be examined by the
Missions / Posts on merits on case-to-case basis and,
after issue of Business visa, an intimation will be
sent to the Indian Mission / Post in the applicant’s
country of origin.
(vi) The documents/ papers pertaining to proposed
business activity such as the registration of the
company under the Companies Act, proof of
registration of the firm with the State Industries
Department or the Export Promotion Council
concerned or any recognised promotional body in
the relevant field of industry or trade etc. will be
thoroughly checked to decide the category of visa
applicable to the foreigner
(vii) The grant of Business Visa is subject to any
instructions issued by the Government of India on
the basis of reciprocity with other foreign countries
from time to time.

Who are eligible for a Business Visa ?
A Business visa may be granted to a foreigner for the
following purposes:-
(i) Foreign nationals who wish to visit India to establish
industrial/business venture or to explore possibilities
to set up industrial/business venture in India.
3
(ii) Foreign nationals coming to India to purchase/sell
industrial products or commercial products or
consumer durables.
(iii) Foreign nationals coming to India for technical
meetings/discussions, attending Board meetings or
general meetings for providing business services
support.
(iv) Foreign nationals coming to India for recruitment of
manpower.
(v) Foreign nationals who are partners in the business
and/or functioning as Directors of the company.
(vi) Foreign nationals coming to India for consultations
regarding exhibitions or for participation in
exhibitions, trade fairs, business fairs etc.
(vii) Foreign buyers who come to transact business with
suppliers/ potential suppliers at locations in India, to
evaluate or monitor quality, give specifications,
place orders, negotiate further supplies etc., relating
to goods or services procured from India.
(viii) Foreign experts/specialists on a visit of short
duration in connection with an ongoing project with
the objective of monitoring the progress of the work,
conducting meetings with Indian customers and/or to
provide technical guidance.
(ix) Foreign nationals coming to India for pre-sales or
post-sales activity not amounting to actual execution
of any contract or project.
(x) Foreign trainees of multinational
companies/corporate houses coming for in-house
training in the regional hubs of the concerned
company located in India.
(xi) Foreign students sponsored by AIESEC for
internship on project based work in
companies/industries.
(xii) Foreign nationals coming as tour conductors and
travel agents and / or conducting business tours of
foreigners or business relating to it, etc.

What is the duration of a Business Visa ?
A Business Visa with multiple entry facility can be
granted for a period up to five (5) years or for a shorter duration
as per the requirement. A stay stipulation of a maximum period
of six (6) months will be prescribed for each visit by the
concerned Indian Mission keeping in view the nature of the
business activity for which such Business Visa is granted.
In case Missions/ Posts abroad, while issuing Business
Visa, decide to prescribe a stay stipulation of maximum 6
months for each visit, a clear endorsement should be made
stating "each stay not to exceed 6 months (or the duration of
stay stipulation) and registration not required". In case no
such stay stipulation is being prescribed, a simple endorsement
stating "registration within 14 days" should be made.
Indian Missions can grant Business Visa with 10 years
validity and multiple entry facility to the nationals of the United
States of America. This visa should be issued with the
stipulation that the stay in India during each visit shall not
exceed six (6) months.
In case business visa is granted for a period less than five
years by the Indian Missions, the same can be extended up to a
maximum period of five years subject to following:
(a) The gross sales/turnover from the business activities,
for which the foreigner has been granted visa, is not
less than Rs.1 crore per annum (to be achieved
within 2 years of setting up the business).
(b) First extension on business visa shall be granted by
the Ministry of Home Affairs.
(c) Further extensions, if required, may be granted by
the State Governments/ UT administrations/ FRROs/
FROs on year-to-year basis subject to good conduct,
production of necessary documents in support of
continued business activity and no adverse inputs,
security related or otherwise, about the foreigner.
(d) The period of extension shall not be beyond five
years from the date of issue of the Business visa.
(e) If the extension of Visa is denied by
MHA/FRRO/FRO/State Government/ UT
Administration, the foreigner shall leave India
forthwith on expiry of the period of validity of the
visa.

What are the documents to be submitted alongwith application for a Business Visa?
(i) The foreign national must have a valid travel
document and a re-entry permit, if required under
the law of the country concerned.
(ii) Proof of financial standing and expertise in the
field of intended business.
(iii) Documents/ papers pertaining to proposed business
activity such as the registration of the company
under the Companies Act, proof of registration of
the firm with the State Industries Department or the
Export Promotion Council concerned or any
recognised promotional body in the relevant field
of industry or trade etc.


What is an Employment Visa?
An Employment Visa is granted to foreigners desiring to
come to India for the purpose of employment, subject to
fulfillment of the following conditions:
(i) The applicant is a highly skilled and/or qualified
professional, who is being engaged or appointed by a
company/ organization/ industry/ undertaking in India
on contract or employment basis.
(ii) Employment Visa shall not be granted for jobs for
which qualified Indians are available. Employment
Visa shall also not be granted for routine, ordinary or
secretarial/clerical jobs.
(iii)The foreign national seeks to visit India for
employment in a company/ firm/organization
registered in India or for employment in a foreign
company/ firm/organization engaged for execution of
some project in India.
(iv) The foreign national being sponsored for an
Employment Visa in any sector should draw a salary
in excess of US$ 25,000 per annum. However, this
condition of annual floor limit on income will not
apply to: (a) Ethnic cooks, (b) Language teachers
(other than English language teachers) / translators
and (c) Staff working for the concerned
Embassy/High Commission in India. The application
for Employment Visa may be rejected by the Indian
Mission/Post concerned in case the minimum annual
income benchmark of US$ 25,000 is not met, except
in the case of the three categories mentioned above.
There will be no need to refer such cases for
consideration of the Ministry of Labour &
Employment for clearance. The guidelines issued by
the Ministry of Labour & Employment vide their OM
no.DGET-M-26025/4/2009-MP(G) dated 8th
September 2009 and the amendment dated 22nd
December, 2009 will no longer be applicable in view
of these stipulations.
(v) The foreign national must comply with all legal
requirements like payment of tax liabilities etc.
(vi) The Employment Visa must be issued from the
country of origin or from the country of domicile of
the foreigner provided the period of permanent
residence of the applicant in that particular country is
more than 2 years.
(vii) The documents/ papers pertaining to the proposed
employment, like the registration of the company
under the Companies Act, proof of registration of the
firm in the State Industries Department or the Export
Promotion Council concerned, or any recognised
promotional body in the field of industry and trade etc
will be thoroughly checked to decide the category of
visa that may be issued to the foreigner.
The name of the sponsoring employer / organization shall be
clearly stipulated in the visa sticker.

What are the other categories of foreign nationals who
are eligible for Employment visa?
Subject to the fulfillment of the conditions enumerated
in Question B5 above, the following categories of foreign
nationals will also be eligible for Employment visa:-
(i) Foreign nationals coming to India as consultant on
contract for whom the Indian company pays a fixed
remuneration (this may not be in the form of a
monthly salary).

(ii) Foreign artists engaged to conduct regular
performances for the duration of the employment
contract given by Hotels, Clubs, other organizations.
(iii) Foreign nationals who are coming to India to take up
employment as coaches of national /state level teams
or reputed sports clubs.

(iv) Foreign sportsmen who are given contract for a
specified period by the Indian Clubs/organizations.
(v) Self-employed foreign nationals coming to India for
providing engineering, medical, accounting, legal or
such other highly skilled services in their capacity as
independent consultants provided the provision of
such services by foreign nationals is permitted under
law.
(vi) Foreign language teachers/interpreters.
(vii) Foreign specialist Chefs.
(viii) Foreign engineers/technicians coming to India for
installation and commissioning of
equipment/machines/tools in terms of the contract for
supply of such equipment/machines/tools.
(ix) Foreign nationals deputed for providing technical
support/services, transfer of know-how/services for
which the Indian company pays fees/royalty to the
foreign company.

What is the duration of an Employment Visa?
Validity of an Employment visa will be as follows:-

(i) A foreign technician/expert coming to India in
pursuance of a bilateral agreement between the
Government of India and the foreign government,
or in pursuance of a collaboration agreement that
has been approved by the Government of India,
can be granted an Employment visa for the
duration of the agreement, or for a period of five
years, whichever is less, with multiple entry
facilities.
(ii) In the case of highly skilled foreign personnel
being employed in the IT software and IT enabled
sectors, the Missions/Posts can grant Employment
visa with validity up to 3 years or the term of
assignment, whichever is less, with multiple entry
facility.
(iii) A foreigner coming to India for employment not
covered in (i) or (ii) above can be granted
Employment visa with a validity up to two years or
the term of assignment, whichever is less, with
multiple entry facility.
(iv) In the case of Employment Visa issued for a period
of 180 days or less, registration is not required with
FRRO/FRO. The Missions/Posts may issue
multiple entry Employment Visa for a period of
180 days or less.
(v) However, if the Employment visa is valid for a
period of more than 180 days, it should carry an
endorsement to the effect that the E-visa holder
must register with the FRRO/FRO concerned
within 14 days of arrival.
(vi) On registration, the FRRO/FRO concerned may
issue Residential Permit for the validity of the visa
period. However, if there is any change in the
residential address, the foreign national concerned
shall immediately report the change of address, in
writing, to the FRRO/FRO concerned.
(vii) The Employment visa may be extended by the
State Governments / UTs / FRROs / FROs beyond
the initial visa validity period, up to a total period
of 5 years from the date of issue of the initial
Employment Visa, on an year to year basis, subject
to good conduct, production of necessary
documents in support of continued employment,
filing of Income Tax returns and no adverse
security inputs about the foreigner. The period of
extension shall not exceed five years from the date
of issue of the initial Employment visa.

What documents are required to be submitted alongwith application for Employment Visa?
(i) The foreign national must have a valid travel
document and a re-entry permit, if required under
the law of the country concerned.
(ii) The foreign national must submit proof of his/her
employment of contract or engagement by the
company / organization, etc. in India.
(iii) The foreign national must submit documentary
proof of his educational qualifications and
professional expertise.
(iv) The foreign national must submit documents/
papers pertaining to the proposed employment, like
the registration of the company under the
Companies Act, proof of registration of the firm in
the State Industries Department or the Export
Promotion Council concerned, or any recognised
promotional body in the field of industry and trade
etc.
Part C: Other queries relating to Business and
Employment Visa

What is the type of visa granted to foreigners wishing to work with NGOs registered in India?
A foreigner who wishes to come to India for honorary
work (without salary) with NGOs registered in India may be
granted Employment Visa with special endorsement on his/ her
E Visa “TO WORK WITH NGO— (Name of the NGO and
place of work) subject to usual checks and formalities on the
following conditions:
(i) The foreigner must submit proof of his/her
employment with the NGO registered in India.
(ii) The foreigner may be granted a multi- entry
employment visa for one year initially. The visa
may be extended by the State Governments / UTs /
FRROs / FROs beyond the initial visa validity
period up to a total period of 5 years from the date
of issue of the initial Employment Visa, on an year
11
to year basis, subject to good conduct, production
of necessary documents in support of continued
employment and no adverse security inputs about
the foreigner. The period of extension shall not
exceed five years from the date of issue of the
initial Employment visa.
(iii) All registration formalities as per rules, after
his/her arrival in India, shall be strictly complied
with and the registration must be done with the
FRRO/FRO within 14 days from the date of his/
her arrival.


Which category of Visa will be granted to family members of foreign nationals coming to India on Business Visa?
Family members/dependants of a foreigner who is
granted ‘Business visa’ visa may be granted `X' visa subject to
usual security checks provided the family members are
otherwise eligible for grant of such a visa . Its validity should be
co-terminus with the validity of the visa of the principal visa
holder or for such shorter period as may be considered
necessary by the Indian Mission.”

Which category of Visa will be granted to family members of foreign nationals coming to India on Employment?
Family members/ dependents of a foreigner who is
granted `E’ visa shall be granted `X' visa subject to usual
security checks provided the family members are otherwise
eligible for grant of such a Visa. Its validity shall be coterminus with the validity of the visa of the principal visa holder
[or for such shorter period as may be considered necessary by
the Indian Mission]

Whether the Business visa can be converted to any other type of visa within the country?
Business visa shall be non-convertible and nonextendable beyond 5 years from the date of issue. At time of
issue of Business visa, India Missions/Posts must make it clear
to the foreigner that a Business visa cannot be converted to any
other kind of visa during his/her stay in India except in the
following circumstances and with the prior approval of the
Ministry of Home Affairs:
a) Business visa can be converted to ‘X’(Entry) Visa if
a foreigner who has come to India on Business visa
marries an Indian national during the validity of
his/her visa and does not intend to continue on
Business Visa. Such conversion would be considered
subject to fulfillment of following conditions:
(i) submission of a copy of registered Marriage
Certificate , and

(ii) report from the FRRO/FRO concerned about
their marital status which will inter-alia include
his/her antecedents, confirmation about their
living together and security clearance.
b) Business visa in case of Persons of Indian Origin,
who were otherwise entitled for ‘X’ (Entry) Visa
but have entered into India on Business visa, can
also be converted to ‘X’ Visa.
c) Business visa of the foreigners who fall ill after
their entry into India rendering them unfit to travel
and require specialized medical treatment may be
converted to Medical visa if they are eligible for
grant of Medical Visa and medical certificate is
obtained from government / governmentrecognized hospitals. In such a case, ‘X’ visa of
family members/ attendant accompanying the
foreigner (whose ‘Business’ visa is converted into
Medical Visa) may also be converted into Medical
Attendant [Med X] visa co-terminus with the
Medical visa of the foreigner.
Note: On conversion of Business visa into ‘X’ visa
/ Medical visa/ ‘Med X’ visa, the following
endorsement shall be made on the Passport /
Residential Permit - “Employment/Business not
permitted”.

Whether Employment visa can be converted to any other type of visa within the country?
Employment Visa cannot be converted to any other kind
of visa during the stay of the foreigner in India except in the
following circumstances and with the prior approval of the
Ministry of Home Affairs:
a) Employment visa can be converted to ‘X’ (Entry)
Visa if a foreigner who has come to India on
Employment visa marries an Indian national during
the validity of his/her visa and does not intend to
continue on Employment Visa. Such conversion
would be considered subject to fulfillment of
following conditions:
(i) submission of a copy of registered
Marriage Certificate , and

(ii) report from the FRRO/FRO concerned
about their marital status which will
inter-alia include his/her antecedents,
confirmation about their living together
and security clearance.
b) Employment visa in case of Persons of Indian
Origin, who were otherwise entitled for ‘X’ (Entry)
Visa but have entered into India on Employment
visa, can also be converted to ‘X’ Visa.
c) Employment visa of the foreigners who fall ill after
their entry into India rendering them unfit to travel
and require specialized medical treatment can be
converted to Medical visa if they are eligible for
grant of Medical Visa and medical certificate is
obtained from government/government-recognized
hospitals. In such a case, ‘X’ visa of family
members/ attendant accompanying the foreigner
(whose ‘Employment’ visa is converted into
Medical Visa) can also be converted into Medical
Attendant [Med X] visa co-terminus with the
Medical visa of the foreigner.
Note: On conversion of Employment visa into ‘X’
visa / Medical visa/ ‘Med X’ visa, the following
endorsement shall be made on the Passport /
Residential Permit - “Employment/Business not
permitted”.

Can foreign nationals coming to execute projects in India be granted Business Visas?
No. A foreign national coming for executing projects /
contracts will have to come only on an Employment Visa.

Can foreign nationals already in India for executing
projects on Business Visas be allowed to extend their
Business Visas?
No.

Can foreign nationals already in India for executing
projects on Business Visas be allowed to convert their
Business Visas to Employment Visas without leaving
the country?
No.

Whether a foreign company/organization that does
not have any Project office/subsidiary/joint
venture/branch office in India can sponsor a foreign
national/employee of a foreign company for
Employment visa ?
No.

Whether an Indian company/organization which has
awarded a contract for execution of a project to a
foreign company that does not have any base in India,
can sponsor employee of foreign company for
Employment visa?
Yes

If the Indian organization/entity sponsors an
Employment Visa, does this mean that the Indian
organization/entity has to necessarily be the legal
employer of the person?
No.

Which category of Visa will be granted to the foreign language teachers/interpreters?
Employment Visa

Which category of Visa will be granted to the foreign
specialist Chefs?
Employment Visa.

Which type of Visa would be granted to senior
management personnel and/or specialists employed by
foreign firms who are relocated to India to work on
specific project/management assignment?
Employment Visa.
